<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      Chapter XXI
    </h2>
<p>
      EVERY drop of blood quivered in the young patrician at sight of her. He
      forgot the crowd, the old man, his own astonishment at the
      incomprehensible things which he had heard,—he saw only her. At
      last, after all his efforts, after long days of alarm, trouble, and
      suffering, he had found her! For the first time he realized that joy might
      rush at the heart, like a wild beast, and squeeze it till breath was lost.
      He, who had supposed hitherto that on “Fortuna” had been imposed a kind of
      duty to accomplish all his wishes, hardly believed his own eyes now and
      his own happiness. Were it not for that disbelief, his passionate nature
      might have urged him to some unconsidered step; but he wished to convince
      himself first that that was not the continuation of those miracles with
      which his head was filled, and that he was not dreaming. But there was no
      doubt,—he saw Lygia, and an interval of barely a few steps divided
      them. She stood in perfect light, so that he could rejoice in the sight of
      her as much as he liked. The hood had fallen from her head and dishevelled
      her hair; her mouth was open slightly, her eyes raised toward the Apostle,
      her face fixed in listening and delighted. She was dressed in a dark
      woollen mantle, like a daughter of the people, but never had Vinicius seen
      her more beautiful; and notwithstanding all the disorder which had risen
      in him, he was struck by the nobility of that wonderful patrician head in
      distinction to the dress, almost that of a slave. Love flew over him like
      a flame, immense, mixed with a marvellous feeling of yearning, homage,
      honor, and desire. He felt the delight which the sight of her caused him;
      he drank of her as of life-giving water after long thirst. Standing near
      the gigantic Lygian, she seemed to him smaller than before, almost a
      child; he noticed, too, that she had grown more slender. Her complexion
      had become almost transparent; she made on him the impression of a flower,
      and a spirit. But all the more did he desire to possess that woman, so
      different from all women whom he had seen or possessed in Rome or the
      Orient. He felt that for her he would have given them all, and with them
      Rome and the world in addition.
    </p>
<p>
      He would have lost himself in gazing, and forgotten himself altogether,
      had it not been for Chilo, who pulled the corner of his mantle, out of
      fear that he might do something to expose them to danger. Meanwhile the
      Christians began to pray and sing. After a while Maranatha thundered
      forth, and then the Great Apostle baptized with water from the fountain
      those whom the presbyters presented as ready for baptism. It seemed to
      Vinicius that that night would never end. He wished now to follow Lygia as
      soon as possible, and seize her on the road or at her house.
    </p>
<p>
      At last some began to leave the cemetery, and Chilo whispered,—“Let
      us go out before the gate, lord, we have not removed our hoods, and people
      look at us.”
     </p>
<p>
      Such was the case, for during the discourse of the Apostle all had cast
      aside their hoods so as to hear better, and they had not followed the
      general example. Chilo’s advice seemed wise, therefore. Standing before
      the gate, they could look at all who passed; Ursus it was easy to
      recognize by his form and size.
    </p>
<p>
      “Let us follow them,” said Chilo; “we shall see to what house they go.
      To-morrow, or rather to-day, thou wilt surround the entrances with slaves
      and take her.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No!” said Vinicius.
    </p>
<p>
      “What dost thou wish to do, lord?”
     </p>
<p>
      “We will follow her to the house and take her now, if thou wilt undertake
      that task, Croton?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I will,” replied Croton, “and I will give myself to thee as a slave if I
      do not break the back of that bison who is guarding her.”
     </p>
<p>
      But Chilo fell to dissuading and entreating them by all the gods not to do
      so. Croton was taken only for defence against attack in case they were
      recognized, not to carry off the girl. To take her when there were only
      two of them was to expose themselves to death, and, what was worse, they
      might let her out of their hands, and then she would hide in another place
      or leave Rome. And what could they do? Why not act with certainty? Why
      expose themselves to destruction and the whole undertaking to failure?
    </p>
<p>
      Though Vinicius restrained himself with the greatest effort from seizing
      Lygia in his arms at once, right there in the cemetery, he felt that the
      Greek was right, and would have lent ear, perhaps, to his counsels, had it
      not been for Croton, to whom reward was the question.
    </p>
<p>
      “Lord, command that old goat to be silent,” said he, “or let me drop my
      fist on his head. Once in Buxentum, whither Lucius Saturnius took me to a
      play, seven drunken gladiators fell on me at an inn, and none of them
      escaped with sound ribs. I do not say to take the girl now from the crowd,
      for they might throw stones before our feet, but once she is at home I
      will seize her, carry her away, and take her whithersoever thou shalt
      indicate.”
     </p>
<p>
      Vinicius was pleased to hear those words, and answered,—“Thus let it
      be, by Hercules! To-morrow we may not find her at home; if we surprise
      them they will remove the girl surely.”
     </p>
<p>
      “This Lygian seems tremendously strong!” groaned Chilo.
    </p>
<p>
      “No one will ask thee to hold his hands,” answered Croton.
    </p>
<p>
      But they had to wait long yet, and the cocks had begun to crow before dawn
      when they saw Ursus coming through the gate, and with him Lygia. They were
      accompanied by a number of other persons. It seemed to Chilo that he
      recognized among them the Great Apostle; next to him walked another old
      man, considerably lower in stature, two women who were not young, and a
      boy, who lighted the way with a lantern. After that handful followed a
      crowd, about two hundred in number; Vinicius, Chilo, and Croton walked
      with these people.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, lord,” said Chilo, “thy maiden is under powerful protection. That is
      the Great Apostle with her, for see how passing people kneel to him.”
     </p>
<p>
      People did in fact kneel before him, but Vinicius did not look at them. He
      did not lose Lygia from his eyes for a moment; he thought only of bearing
      her away and, accustomed as he had been in wars to stratagems of all
      sorts, he arranged in his head the whole plan of seizure with soldierly
      precision. He felt that the step on which he had decided was bold, but he
      knew well that bold attacks give success generally.
    </p>
<p>
      The way was long; hence at moments he thought too of the gulf which that
      wonderful religion had dug between him and Lygia. Now he understood
      everything that had happened in the past, and why it had happened. He was
      sufficiently penetrating for that. Lygia he had not known hitherto. He had
      seen in her a maiden wonderful beyond others, a maiden toward whom his
      feelings were inflamed: he knew now that her religion made her different
      from other women, and his hope that feeling, desire, wealth, luxury, would
      attract her he knew now to be a vain illusion. Finally he understood this,
      which he and Petronius had not understood, that the new religion ingrafted
      into the soul something unknown to that world in which he lived, and that
      Lygia, even if she loved him, would not sacrifice any of her Christian
      truths for his sake, and that, if pleasure existed for her, it was a
      pleasure different altogether from that which he and Petronius and Cæsar’s
      court and all Rome were pursuing. Every other woman whom he knew might
      become his mistress, but that Christian would become only his victim. And
      when he thought of this, he felt anger and burning pain, for he felt that
      his anger was powerless. To carry off Lygia seemed to him possible; he was
      almost sure that he could take her, but he was equally sure that, in view
      of her religion, he himself with his bravery was nothing, that his power
      was nothing, and that through it he could effect nothing. That Roman
      military tribune, convinced that the power of the sword and the fist which
      had conquered the world, would command it forever, saw for the first time
      in life that beyond that power there might be something else; hence he
      asked himself with amazement what it was. And he could not answer
      distinctly; through his head flew merely pictures of the cemetery, the
      assembled crowd, and Lygia, listening with her whole soul to the words of
      the old man, as he narrated the passion, death, and resurrection of the
      God-man, who had redeemed the world, and promised it happiness on the
      other shore of the Styx.
    </p>
<p>
      When he thought of this, chaos rose in his head. But he was brought out of
      this chaos by Chilo, who fell to lamenting his own fate. He had agreed to
      find Lygia. He had sought for her in peril of his life, and he had pointed
      her out. But what more do they want? Had he offered to carry the maiden
      away? Who could ask anything like this of a maimed man deprived of two
      fingers, an old man, devoted to meditation, to science, and virtue? What
      would happen were a lord of such dignity as Vinicius to meet some mishap
      while bearing the maiden away? It is true that the gods are bound to watch
      over their chosen ones,—but have not such things happened more than
      once, as if the gods were playing games instead of watching what was
      passing in the world? Fortune is blindfold, as is well known, and does not
      see even in daylight; what must the case be at night? Let something
      happen,—let that Lygian bear hurl a millstone at the noble Vinicius,
      or a keg of wine, or, still worse, water,—who will give assurance
      that instead of a reward blame will not fall on the hapless Chilo? He, the
      poor sage, has attached himself to the noble Vinicius as Aristotle to
      Alexander of Macedon. If the noble lord should give him at least that
      purse which he had thrust into his girdle before leaving home, there would
      be something with which to invoke aid in case of need, or to influence the
      Christians. Oh, why not listen to the counsels of an old man, counsels
      dictated by experience and prudence?
    </p>
<p>
      Vinicius, hearing this, took the purse from his belt, and threw it to the
      fingers of Chilo.
    </p>
<p>
      “Thou hast it; be silent!”
     </p>
<p>
      The Greek felt that it was unusually heavy, and gained confidence.
    </p>
<p>
      “My whole hope is in this,” said he, “that Hercules or Theseus performed
      deeds still more arduous; what is my personal, nearest friend, Croton, if
      not Hercules? Thee, worthy lord, I will not call a demigod, for thou art a
      full god, and in future thou wilt not forget a poor, faithful servant,
      whose needs it will be necessary to provide for from time to time, for
      once he is sunk in books, he thinks of nothing else; some few stadia of
      garden land and a little house, even with the smallest portico, for
      coolness in summer, would befit such a donor. Meanwhile I shall admire thy
      heroic deeds from afar, and invoke Jove to befriend thee, and if need be I
      will make such an outcry that half Rome will be roused to thy assistance.
      What a wretched, rough road! The olive oil is burned out in the lantern;
      and if Croton, who is as noble as he is strong, would bear me to the gate
      in his arms, he would learn, to begin with, whether he will carry the
      maiden easily; second, he would act like Æneas, and win all the good gods
      to such a degree that touching the result of the enterprise I should be
      thoroughly satisfied.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I should rather carry a sheep which died of mange a month ago,” answered
      the gladiator; “but give that purse, bestowed by the worthy tribune, and I
      will bear thee to the gate.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Mayst thou knock the great toe from thy foot,” replied the Greek; “what
      profit hast thou from the teachings of that worthy old man, who described
      poverty and charity as the two foremost virtues? Has he not commanded thee
      expressly to love me? Never shall I make thee, I see, even a poor
      Christian; it would be easier for the sun to pierce the walls of the
      Mamertine prison than for truth to penetrate thy skull of a hippopotamus.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Never fear!” said Croton, who with the strength of a beast had no human
      feeling. “I shall not be a Christian! I have no wish to lose my bread.”
     </p>
<p>
      “But if thou knew even the rudiments of philosophy, thou wouldst know that
      gold is vanity.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Come to me with thy philosophy. I will give thee one blow of my head in
      the stomach; we shall see then who wins.”
     </p>
<p>
      “An ox might have said the same to Aristotle,” retorted Chilo.
    </p>
<p>
      It was growing gray in the world. The dawn covered with pale light the
      outlines of the walls. The trees along the wayside, the buildings, and the
      gravestones scattered here and there began to issue from the shade. The
      road was no longer quite empty. Marketmen were moving toward the gates,
      leading asses and mules laden with vegetables; here and there moved
      creaking carts in which game was conveyed. On the road and along both
      sides of it was a light mist at the very earth, which promised good
      weather. People at some distance seemed like apparitions in that mist.
      Vinicius stared at the slender form of Lygia, which became more silvery as
      the light increased.
    </p>
<p>
      “Lord,” said Chilo, “I should offend thee were I to foresee the end of thy
      bounty, but now, when thou hast paid me, I may not be suspected of
      speaking for my own interest only. I advise thee once more to go home for
      slaves and a litter, when thou hast learned in what house the divine Lygia
      dwells; listen not to that elephant trunk, Croton, who undertakes to carry
      off the maiden only to squeeze thy purse as if it were a bag of curds.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I have a blow of the fist to be struck between the shoulders, which means
      that thou wilt perish,” said Croton.
    </p>
<p>
      “I have a cask of Cephalonian wine, which means that I shall be well,”
       answered Chilo.
    </p>
<p>
      Vinicius made no answer, for he approached the gate, at which a wonderful
      sight struck his eyes. Two soldiers knelt when the Apostle was passing;
      Peter placed his hand on their iron helmets for a moment, and then made
      the sign of the cross on them. It had never occurred to the patrician
      before that there could be Christians in the army; with astonishment he
      thought that as fire in a burning city takes in more and more houses, so
      to all appearances that doctrine embraces new souls every day, and extends
      itself over all human understandings. This struck him also with reference
      to Lygia, for he was convinced that, had she wished to flee from the city,
      there would be guards willing to facilitate her flight. He thanked the
      gods then that this had not happened.
    </p>
<p>
      After they had passed vacant places beyond the wall, the Christians began
      to scatter. There was need, therefore, to follow Lygia more from a
      distance, and more carefully, so as not to rouse attention. Chilo fell to
      complaining of wounds, of pains in his legs, and dropped more and more to
      the rear. Vinicius did not oppose this, judging that the cowardly and
      incompetent Greek would not be needed. He would even have permitted him to
      depart, had he wished; but the worthy sage was detained by circumspection.
      Curiosity pressed him evidently, since he continued behind, and at moments
      even approached with his previous counsels; he thought too that the old
      man accompanying the Apostle might be Glaucus, were it not for his rather
      low stature.
    </p>
<p>
      They walked a good while before reaching the Trans-Tiber, and the sun was
      near rising when the group surrounding Lygia dispersed. The Apostle, an
      old woman, and a boy went up the river; the old man of lower stature,
      Ursus, and Lygia entered a narrow vicus, and, advancing still about a
      hundred yards, went into a house in which were two shops,—one for
      the sale of olives, the other for poultry.
    </p>
<p>
      Chilo, who walked about fifty yards behind Vinicius and Croton, halted all
      at once, as if fixed to the earth, and, squeezing up to the wall, began to
      hiss at them to turn.
    </p>
<p>
      They did so, for they needed to take counsel.
    </p>
<p>
      “Go, Chilo,” said Vinicius, “and see if this house fronts on another
      street.” Chilo, though he had complained of wounds in his feet, sprang
      away as quickly as if he had had the wings of Mercury on his ankles, and
      returned in a moment.
    </p>
<p>
      “No,” said he, “there is but one entrance.”
     </p>
<p>
      Then, putting his hands together, he said, “I implore thee, lord, by
      Jupiter, Apollo, Vesta, Cybele, Isis, Osiris, Mithra Baal, and all the
      gods of the Orient and the Occident to drop this plan. Listen to me—”
     </p>
<p>
      But he stopped on a sudden, for he saw that Vinicius’s face was pale from
      emotion, and that his eyes were glittering like the eyes of a wolf. It was
      enough to look at him to understand that nothing in the world would
      restrain him from the undertaking. Croton began to draw air into his
      herculean breast, and to sway his undeveloped skull from side to side as
      bears do when confined in a cage, but on his face not the least fear was
      evident.
    </p>
<p>
      “I will go in first,” said he.
    </p>
<p>
      “Thou wilt follow me,” said Vinicius, in commanding tones.
    </p>
<p>
      And after a while both vanished in the dark entrance.
    </p>
<p>
      Chilo sprang to the corner of the nearest alley and watched from behind
      it, waiting for what would happen.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0022" name="link2HCH0022">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
