<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      Chapter V
    </h2>
<p>
      AULUS had judged rightly that he would not be admitted to Nero’s presence.
      They told him that Cæsar was occupied in singing with the lute-player,
      Terpnos, and that in general he did not receive those whom he himself had
      not summoned. In other words, that Aulus must not attempt in future to see
      him.
    </p>
<p>
      Seneca, though ill with a fever, received the old general with due honor;
      but when he had heard what the question was, he laughed bitterly, and
      said,—“I can render thee only one service, noble Plautius, not to
      show Cæsar at any time that my heart feels thy pain, or that I should like
      to aid thee; for should Cæsar have the least suspicion on this head, know
      that he would not give thee back Lygia, though for no other reason than to
      spite me.”
     </p>
<p>
      He did not advise him, either, to go to Tigellinus or Vatinius or
      Vitelius. It might be possible to do something with them through money;
      perhaps, also, they would like to do evil to Petronius, whose influence
      they were trying to undermine, but most likely they would disclose before
      Nero how dear Lygia was to Plautius, and then Nero would all the more
      resolve not to yield her to him. Here the old sage began to speak with a
      biting irony, which he turned against himself: “Thou hast been silent,
      Plautius, thou hast been silent for whole years, and Cæsar does not like
      those who are silent. How couldst thou help being carried away by his
      beauty, his virtue, his singing, his declamation, his chariot-driving, and
      his verses? Why didst thou not glorify the death of Britannicus, and
      repeat panegyrics in honor of the mother-slayer, and not offer
      congratulations after the stifling of Octavia? Thou art lacking in
      foresight, Aulus, which we who live happily at the court possess in proper
      measure.”
     </p>
<p>
      Thus speaking, he raised a goblet which he carried at his belt, took water
      from a fountain at the impluvium, freshened his burning lips, and
      continued,—“Ah, Nero has a grateful heart. He loves thee because
      thou hast served Rome and glorified its name at the ends of the earth; he
      loves me because I was his master in youth. Therefore, seest thou, I know
      that this water is not poisoned, and I drink it in peace. Wine in my own
      house would be less reliable. If thou art thirsty, drink boldly of this
      water. The aqueducts bring it from beyond the Alban hills, and any one
      wishing to poison it would have to poison every fountain in Rome. As thou
      seest, it is possible yet to be safe in this world and to have a quiet old
      age. I am sick, it is true, but rather in soul than in body.”
     </p>
<p>
      This was true. Seneca lacked the strength of soul which Cornutus
      possessed, for example, or Thrasea; hence his life was a series of
      concessions to crime. He felt this himself; he understood that an adherent
      of the principles of Zeno, of Citium, should go by another road, and he
      suffered more from that cause than from the fear of death itself.
    </p>
<p>
      But the general interrupted these reflections full of grief.
    </p>
<p>
      “Noble Annæus,” said he, “I know how Cæsar rewarded thee for the care with
      which thou didst surround his years of youth. But the author of the
      removal of Lygia is Petronius. Indicate to me a method against him,
      indicate the influences to which he yields, and use besides with him all
      the eloquence with which friendship for me of long standing can inspire
      thee.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Petronius and I,” answered Seneca, “are men of two opposite camps; I know
      of no method against him, he yields to no man’s influence. Perhaps with
      all his corruption he is worthier than those scoundrels with whom Nero
      surrounds himself at present. But to show him that he has done an evil
      deed is to lose time simply. Petronius has lost long since that faculty
      which distinguishes good from evil. Show him that his act is ugly, he will
      be ashamed of it. When I see him, I will say, ‘Thy act is worthy of a
      freedman.’ If that will not help thee, nothing can.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Thanks for that, even,” answered the general.
    </p>
<p>
      Then he gave command to carry him to the house of Vinicius, whom he found
      at sword practice with his domestic trainer. Aulus was borne away by
      terrible anger at sight of the young man occupied calmly with fencing
      during the attack on Lygia; and barely had the curtain dropped behind the
      trainer when this anger burst forth in a torrent of bitter reproaches and
      injuries. But Vinicius, when he learned that Lygia had been carried away,
      grew so terribly pale that Aulus could not for even an instant suspect him
      of sharing in the deed. The young man’s forehead was covered with sweat;
      the blood, which had rushed to his heart for a moment, returned to his
      face in a burning wave; his eyes began to shoot sparks, his mouth to hurl
      disconnected questions. Jealousy and rage tossed him in turn, like a
      tempest. It seemed to him that Lygia, once she had crossed the threshold
      of Cæsar’s house, was lost to him absolutely. When Aulus pronounced the
      name of Petronius, suspicion flew like a lightning flash through the young
      soldier’s mind, that Petronius had made sport of him, and either wanted to
      win new favor from Nero by the gift of Lygia, or keep her for himself.
      That any one who had seen Lygia would not desire her at once, did not find
      a place in his head. Impetuousness, inherited in his family, carried him
      away like a wild horse, and took from him presence of mind.
    </p>
<p>
      “General,” said he, with a broken voice, “return home and wait for me.
      Know that if Petronius were my own father, I would avenge on him the wrong
      done to Lygia. Return home and wait for me. Neither Petronius nor Cæsar
      will have her.”
     </p>
<p>
      Then he went with clinched fists to the waxed masks standing clothed in
      the atrium, and burst out,—“By those mortal masks! I would rather
      kill her and myself.” When he had said this, he sent another “Wait for me”
       after Aulus, then ran forth like a madman from the atrium, and flew to
      Petronius’s house, thrusting pedestrians aside on the way.
    </p>
<p>
      Aulus returned home with a certain encouragement. He judged that if
      Petronius had persuaded Cæsar to take Lygia to give her to Vinicius,
      Vinicius would bring her to their house. Finally, the thought was no
      little consolation to him, that should Lygia not be rescued she would be
      avenged and protected by death from disgrace. He believed that Vinicius
      would do everything that he had promised. He had seen his rage, and he
      knew the excitability innate in the whole family. He himself, though he
      loved Lygia as her own father, would rather kill her than give her to
      Cæsar; and had he not regarded his son, the last descendant of his stock,
      he would doubtless have done so. Aulus was a soldier; he had hardly heard
      of the Stoics, but in character he was not far from their ideas,—death
      was more acceptable to his pride than disgrace.
    </p>
<p>
      When he returned home, he pacified Pomponia, gave her the consolation that
      he had, and both began to await news from Vinicius. At moments when the
      steps of some of the slaves were heard in the atrium, they thought that
      perhaps Vinicius was bringing their beloved child to them, and they were
      ready in the depth of their souls to bless both. Time passed, however, and
      no news came. Only in the evening was the hammer heard on the gate.
    </p>
<p>
      After a while a slave entered and handed Aulus a letter. The old general,
      though he liked to show command over himself, took it with a somewhat
      trembling hand, and began to read as hastily as if it were a question of
      his whole house.
    </p>
<p>
      All at once his face darkened, as if a shadow from a passing cloud had
      fallen on it.
    </p>
<p>
      “Read,” said he, turning to Pomponia.
    </p>
<p>
      Pomponia took the letter and read as follows:—
    </p>
<p>
      “Marcus Vinicius to Aulus Plautius greeting. What has happened, has
      happened by the will of Cæsar, before which incline your heads, as I and
      Petronius incline ours.”
     </p>
<p>
      A long silence followed.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0006" name="link2HCH0006">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
